Add STP documentation (#68)
bisdn/bisdn.github.io: network_configuration/stp.md

---

> title: Spanning Tree (xSTP)

Reviewer: already fixed

parent: Network Configuration
---

> # Spanning Tree (xSTP)

Reviewer: fixed

**WARNING**: BISDN Linux currently supports standard STP (IEEE Standard 802.1d) and RSTP (IEEE Standard 802.1w). For current network topologies, RSTP is the protocol more commonly used. For RSTP you *have* to use the packaged [mstpd](https://github.com/mstpd/mstpd).
{: .label .label-red }

## STP Configuration Instruction

For configuring STP we assume the following configuration. In this document only the switch configuration is shown.

![Topology](/assets/img/stp-topology.png)

Creation of the bridge is the as follows:

```
ip link add name swbridge type bridge vlan_filtering 1 stp_state 1
```

The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

## STP operation

We can see the ports that are configured in bridges, along with their STP state, priority, and cost, with the following command:

```
agema-ag4610:~$ bridge link

> 15: port2: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 master br0 state forwarding priority 32 cost 2

Reviewer 2: either br0 or swbridge

Reviewer: has been changed to swbridge

16: port3: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 master br0 state forwarding priority 32 cost 3
```

> After setting up the bridge and bridge ports, the STP state on the bridge can be managed over the `brctl` utility. The following command shows example output of a command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After setting up the bridge and bridge ports, the STP state on the bridge can be managed over the `brctl` utility. The following example shows the output of a `brctl` command:
```

 flags

port7 (1)
 port id                8001                    state                  blocking
 designated root        8000.62e79c6a4489       path cost                  2
 designated bridge      8000.62e79c6a4489       message age timer          0.00
 designated port        8001                    forward delay timer        0.00
 designated cost           0                    hold timer                 0.00
 flags

port8 (2)
 port id                8002                    state                  blocking
 designated root        8000.62e79c6a4489       path cost                  2
 designated bridge      8000.62e79c6a4489       message age timer          0.00
 designated port        8002                    forward delay timer        0.00
 designated cost           0                    hold timer                 0.00
 flags

```

# Rapid Spanning Tree (RSTP)

## Introduction 

Meant as an improvement to the original STP standard, RSTP improves Spanning Tree convergence after network topology changes. If the switch is configured for RSTP and receives a STP (802.1d) BPDU, then STP functionality is assumed.

> There is currently no RSTP support in the Linux Kernel and therefore BISDN Linux uses [mstpd](https://github.com/mstpd/mstpd) to configure and manage RSTP.

Reviewer 2: Is how to enable mstpd in BSDN linux documented somewhere else already? If not, it should be added here that mstpd  is not enabled by default and how to enable/start it.

mstpd is managed by systemd and is disabled by default. For documentation on how to manage the service refer to [systemd getting started](https://docs.bisdn.de/getting_started/configure_baseboxd.html#getting-started).

## RSTP configuration

> The same topology as above is considered in this scenario.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `mstpd` is enabled, any configured bridge will have STP enabled by default. Therefore, it is not required to specify the `stp_state` flag when creating a bridge:
```

```
ip link add name swbridge type bridge vlan_filtering 1
```

> mstpd takes over the stp_state flag and instead of setting it to 1 (referring to the Kernel implementation), it will be set to 2 (referring to the Userspace implementation of STP, in this case handled by mstpd). 

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a bit confusing. We don't need to set the stp_state flag when creating a bridge and mstpd will do that automatically by enabling stp when we create a bridge?

Reviewer: Sentence has been rewritten

> The stp_state flag has three possible values: 0, 1, 2. By choosing 1 then the Kernel implementation of STP will be used, and when choosing 2 then there is a Userspace implementation of STP. Enabling mstpd will set this value to 2 on the bridges.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

The following steps of configuring the ports and attaching them to the bridge can be seen in [VLAN Bridging](network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#vlan-bridging-8021q).

## RSTP operation

> After setting up the bridge and bridge ports, the RSTP state on the bridge can be managed over the `mstpdctl` utility. The following command shows example output of commands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After setting up the bridge and bridge ports, the RSTP state on the bridge can be managed over the `mstpdctl` utility. The following command shows an example command output.
```

After setting up the bridge and bridge ports, the RSTP state on the bridge can be managed over the `mstpdctl` utility. The following command shows an example command output.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

**WARNING**: The `brctl` tool does not work with bridges managed by `mstpd`.
{: .label .label-yellow }

```
